Add blog about CHERI in safety-critical systems. (#22)
CHERIoT-Platform/CHERIoT-Platform.github.io: _posts/2024-11-22-cheri-myths-safety-critical.markdown

 - Assume that stores to one object will not affect the contents of another.
 - And so on.

If you violate the spatial and temporal memory rules of C or C++ then you are doing something that is *undefined behaviour* in the language.
The compiler does not (contrary to popular belief) hate you and use undefined behaviour to try to pick on you, it uses undefined behaviour to make assumptions about things that cannot be guaranteed by the language (or, at least, by common implementations).
If a function takes a `char*` as an argument and accesses `char` 5 from that index, the compiler assumes that this is within the bounds of the object that is pointed to.
Statically verifying that this is true is impossible in the general case (consider `malloc(rand())` as a trivial example - in practice it may require dataflow analysis through the heap, which is at least not feasible) and is incompatible with separate compilation.

*Any program that contains such a bug will be optimised using transforms that are not sound and so may do anything*.

Safer languages, such as Rust and Ada, make the problem easier by providing more type information at function boundaries.

> The optimisers are often the same, the only difference is that C and C++ make enforcing the axioms on which the optimisers depend the programmer's responsibility, whereas safer languages provide type systems that enforce them.

Reviewer: This paragraph feels out of place; should it be at the end of this section, just before "What about MISRA C?"

This unsoundness isn't just limited to optimisation, it applies even in the lowering to machine instructions.
That store of a byte via a `char*` will be lowered to a store instruction.
If it's an in-bounds store to something that the language implementation decides is an object, the behaviour can be mapped back into something in the source language.

> If it is an our-of-bounds store, or a store through a dangling pointer, then the instruction will overwrite *something*, but you can't guarantee what that will be.

Reviewer 2: I think this should be "out-of-bounds" store.

The same is true of Rust.
If you're using purely safe Rust, your code will never trap on a CHERI system.
If you're using `unsafe` in small, locally scoped places, you can provide guarantees that are not visible in the source code to ensure the same properties.
If you write your entire program in unsafe Rust (no one does this!) then you should expect traps.

So do I need CHERI if I'm using MISRA C or Rust?
[I've answered that before](/cheri/myths/2024/08/28/cheri-myths-safe-languages.html), but broadly yes.

## What is your baseline?

To answer the complaint about CHERI trapping, it's worth considering what happens if you have a memory-safety bug today.
You will see one of the following:

 - It's deterministically benign, reads some constant or write over something that's never read.
 - It's deterministically out of a mapped / accessible region will be caught by your MMU / MPU and trap (so we are not worse)
 - It's deterministically leaking information or corrupting other state.
 - It's data dependent and so will nondeterministically do one of the above three options.

> CHERI makes the first case worse in production, because we catch it and trap, but if it's deterministic then we make things better because we catch it in testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At first glance, CHERI seems like it might make the first case worse: in production, we catch the error and trap.
But, since the error is deterministic, CHERI in fact make things better because we catch it in testing.
```

This is part of the 'shift left' approach: bugs caught earlier are cheaper to fix.
If you have a deterministic but 'benign' memory-safety bug, then CHERI will catch it.

The problem with the framing of a 'benign' memory-safety bug is that the benignity is a property of a specific compilation.

> Any change to the compiler, or the global memory layout, may turn them from benign to malign.

Reviewer: Even re-run of the compiler on the same source, perhaps?

Author: Modern compilers try to do deterministic builds, so that's less likely, but maybe worth mentioning.

Something like this will not be dynamically allocating memory, it will not be accessing arbitrary memory locations via untrusted pointers.
It will have a set of inputs that should be amenable to exhaustive testing.

If you have a chip dedicated to running the ABS and that code is written in a safe language, CHERI doesn't improve on the state of the art: you have already statically proven that nothing that CHERI dynamically prevents can happen.
If you are building a *mixed criticality* system, the benefits of CHERI are far more pronounced: CHERI will allow you to collocate things on the same chip that previously needed to be isolated.

## What does CHERIoT do?

CHERIoT RTOS provides three ways for a compartment to handle CHERI failures (and other synchronous trap, such as invalid instruction errors):

 - If there is enough stack space, a compartment may provide an error handler that runs with a copy of the register file and can inspect and modify the state.
 - If there is not enough stack space or the first kind of error handler is not provided, the compartment may provide a *stackless* error handler.
   This is used to implement our structured error handling mechanisms.

>  - If neither is provided, or the error handler returns the force-unwind result, the current compartment call is and control returns to the caller with an error code in the return register.

Reviewer 3: | the current compartment call is 
what? terminated?

Author: Ooops.  Fixed?

For stateless compartments, the last is often the right approach: if something goes wrong, let the caller know.
This is often the best fit approach for safety-critical systems, where things should *never* go wrong and you've got static analysis receipts to demonstrate this.

If you're relying on the notion of a 'benign' error, the first kind of error handler helps.
You can decode the current instruction and determine whether it's a load or store.

> If it's a store, you can skip it, if it's a load you can also also put a zero in the target register.

Reviewer 2: Also is repeated twice.

Ideally, you'd also write some telemetry that would let you fix the bug.

> This turns your 'benign' memory-safety bugs into ones that have deterministic behaviour that is guaranteed not to impact the rest of the system.

Reviewer 3: This sounds like a really terrible idea. Surely no-one would do this?!

Author: I agree, but this is the way of getting the behaviour that they claim they want.

The middle category is most interesting.

> This form uses is most commonly used with `longjmp`, to jump to the nearest error handler on the stack, which would be in violation of MISRA C 21.4, which says that `setjmp.h` may not be used and the functions in it may not be used.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This form is most commonly used with `longjmp`, to jump to the nearest error handler on the stack, which would be in violation of MISRA C 21.4, which says that `setjmp.h` may not be used and the functions in it may not be used.
```
